---
layout: post
title: Movie Binges and Art
---
These past 3 days I went on an 11 movie binge, trying to finish off this list that I started in 2014. In the course of these 3 years, I've watched about 150 movies in an attempt of a sort of cultural education. What have I learned? Other than that you have a ton of free time on your hands when you're single, I think I learned a few main things:

1. The beauty of film is to tell stories, but the stories have to be about real, tangible, human *characters*. A lot of movies miss that. They focus on some cerebral plot or some cool scenery, but at the end of the day, the things you remember from the movies are the memorable people and what you learn about the human condition from watching real people live out different stories. The power in Zorba the Greek or Whiplash or 12 Angry Men is from watching life-size characters react to situations that you believe could arise in that film world, reacting to life. Even if the characters are barely human—looking at you Yiorgos Lanthimos—there's a lot to learn about people from watching those who lack "normalness", as then you realize what are the things we consider "normal" in a person. The movies the floundered (or not necessarily floundered, but were not worth watching again) were the ones that focused too much on action or gags or plot twists. Think The Sixth Sense, the Mission Impossible Movies, Hitch, etc. Once you know the single element the movie loses its power.
2. Meaning comes from what's *not* on the screen. Whether it's a comedy, a thriller, or a drama, the true value of the movie comes from the audience reacting to what's being portrayed. The great movies are the ones who portray their message subtly and let the audience tweeze it out. When you watch Whiplash, there's only a hint of what I see as a warning of the dark road and sacrifice that comes with trying to be great. When you watch The Martian, it doesn't hit you over the head with the fact that it's a tale of humans facing adversity and conquering nature through ingenuity and resilience. When you watch All the King's Men, there's no doubt that it's alluding to the dangerous populist tendencies in American political figures, but there is never a "lecture" moment in the movie. Yet there are some movies who don't seem to trust the audience enough to see the message their peddling, and it's nauseating (looking at you Chi-Raq and Trumbo). All I get from those movies is the lack of trust and storytelling ability in the director. Meaning comes from the silences in the movie, not the explicit scenes.
3. Every (good) director has his or her own voice. After watching multiple movies from the same directors, you get a sense for what type of stories they like to tell and how they like to tell it. Spielberg will find a heroic figure that represents the "ideal" man or American, and he'll fit in some pro-American message about American ideals or virtues or the good in humanity (even if that means showing the darker side of America). He goes for more inspirational and emotionally-powerful stories. David Cronenberg, however, will look for a mildly creepy, twisted, very graphic story, something that shows how twisted humanity can get or the dark sides we have in us. Spike Lee likes to show the viewer the black experience in America and have his characters lecture the audience about plight about black Americans. Yiorgos Lanthimos goes for strange and twisted stories about vacant people who push teh boundaries of what it means to be human, along with touches of graphic violence. Though I wish I could've watched more movies back-to-back to catch more of the style of other directors (for example, though I've watched numerous Scorsese and Kirosawa movies these past few years, I've yet to catch on any real trend for these directors, other than Kirosawa tells stories about medieval Japan and focuses on certain elements of human behavior in each movie). Shows the importance of finding your own voice when creating art. It's about self-expression, and you should see a part of the author in their works for them to be truly authentic.


That's about it. Maybe at some point I'll edit this post and post the list of the movies that I watched, but it's a rather long list, and so I'll save it for another time-wasting day.
