---
layout: post
title: Figure Spotlight: Tommy Wiseau
---
As a first matter, here's my attempt to continue with writing every day (or at least more regularly than once a month, the previous pace I was setting). I'm working on a few things that I need some time to digest and think about before I'm going to be competent enough to explain—specifically reading Ludwig Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations, and that's turning out to be a hard slough (but completely revamping my thinking). Once I have my head wrapped around his ideas and theories, I'll have some posts about his ideas, but that might not be for a while.

In the meantime, the other book that I'm reading is The Disaster Artist, which details the story behind the making of "The Room," one of the best B-movies of all time. I had an interesting thought about it, which I wanted to outline and share. A quick background for those out of the loop: a 'b-movie' is a low-budget movie that was originally meant to be a companion piece to the main feature during a theater run. They are less serious than the main Hollywood films that you typically hear about, and they're primarily an outlet for people to explore fun or cheesy ideas or who just want to experiment with filmmaking. The beauty of these films is that they capture the fun and experience of being an amateur just trying stuff out. As for "The Room," it's known for it's horrible acting, nonsensical plot, and ridiculous storytelling decisions. And the primary visionary behind it was Tommy Wiseau, a mysterious and eccentric man who had complete creative control over the film.

With that, The Disaster Artist is written by Greg Sistero, who starred in the film, and details his relationship with Wiseau and the behind-the-scenes production of the film. The book portrays Wiseau almost as an urban legend. He does the most eccentric things (like order a hot glass of water at every restaurant), and he had completely unjustified confidence in his artistic abilities as a filmmaker and actor.

Full disclosure: I've only read the first third or so of the book, but I wanted to share the thought that I had and the theme that the book is present so far. Many of us feel restricted in our abilities to pursue our creative projects or passions, yet we're afraid of not being good enough or not being talented enough or that nobody will like what we do. But maybe we should embrace how bad we are and dive in—at least that's the message the book seems to push forward. 

Wiseau was a complete disaster: in the acting class with Sistero he was atrocious but would argue with the teacher over what he should do, and during production he almost acted as if he wanted to piss people off. But now The Room turned out to be one of the biggest cult hits of our time. Nobody saw that coming.

The key to the success? Wiseau embraced being Wiseau. He never apologized for himself, and he learned how to be himself, fully and unapologetically. He didn't try to fit another person's mode of success, but rather sought out to achieve his dreams. The book portrays him with a kind of endearing innocence, a naivety that seems out of place in the competitive environment that is show-business. But that type of honesty, that type of innocence, works. As long as you embrace it, people will enjoy your work and what you do and who you are. Of course some will be turned off by it, but that's the point: you can't please everyone. Whatever you're doing, you're expressing yourself in that work—whether it's a creative field like movemaking or it's a mundane job like writing legal memos—and the only way to find success is to be true to who you are. In my (uncultured and non-expert) opinion, what makes The Room work is that it's clearly the expression of who Wiseau is. That's what makes it so entertaining. As Sistero outlines in the book, people were captivated by Wiseau wherever he went, albeit because they thought it was hilarious how bad he was, and that comes through in the movie. You know that The Room is an expression of who Tommy Wiseau is—it's too horribly done to be anything but an honest portrayal of the auteur behind it. And just because it was "bad" doesn't mean it was a bad movie. It actually succeeded on a level that art should strive, that is, it succeeded in showing us more about who the artist behind the work is and expresses the chaos that is Wiseau's mind. 

I know personally that Wiseau's story gives me more confidence to just branch out and explore things that I'm interested in. You never know what will happen. I actually have a constant motto that I've said to myself throughout my life (my friends can vouch for me): if something is worth doing, it's worth doing poorly. That means if you want to do something, try your best at it, but it's okay if you suck. Tommy Wiseau epitomizes and validates that outlook. I know I need to internalize that more than I have. And maybe more of us should.
